---
layout: post
title: "The Rust project wins an OSBAR award"
lang: en-GB
author: Florian Gilcher
---

Last winter, the Rust project has won the bronze award of the Open Source Business Alliance Awards (OSBAR), an award given by the [Open Source Business Alliance](http://osb-alliance.de/) to open source projects that bring benefit both to companies and public entities.

The award was given in appreciation of our successful community building and our push to provide safer programming in areas were they were previously not feasible.

We've been applying for this award multiple times. Writing down an application and having to argue how Rust brings a notable benefit has been a fun experience.

This year, Florian Gilcher will be part of the jury for [the award](https://award.osb-alliance.de/) and would like to encourage fitting Rust projects to apply. Projects submitted should have value for business or for public administration, but should also be proper open source projects.

In the interest of transparency, the full (unedited) application text follows at the end of this post.

## About the OSB Alliance

The [OSB Alliance](http://osb-alliance.de/) is the Germanys biggest network of companies and organisations (academic and otherwise) that develop and use open source software. Its goals are the creation of a positive framework for OSS software by connecting developers, clients and suppliers. The OSB Alliance wants to promote and make successful open collaborations on the basis of open source software.

Its goal is to combine forces in the German open source scene to have more weight in politics, public administration and business. It also wants to improve the publics perception and trust in our work.

-----

# OSBAR project application: Rust

Rust is an open source systems programming environment consisting of the Rust
language compiler, documentation, build and quality control tools that has been
released in a stable version in May 2015. It has taken hold in production
settings and by larger projects in a wide variety of contexts. Rust enables
safe programming in environments where only C or C++ have been feasible options
before. On top of that, Rust is a programming language with a type system
geared towards safe concurrent and parallel programming.

## Technology

The core of Rust is a compiler based on the mature LLVM compiler infastructure. The Rust programming language itself is an imperative programming language with a static type system. The
type system tracks usage of data and can provide automatic memory management at
compile time. This results in a language with the memory-safety properties of
modern managed languages like Java, but without needing runtime support by a
virtual machine or a garbage collector. This allows Rust to be used in
environments where low runtime overhead and predictable memory management is
necessary, while still ensuring memory safety. This is especially interesting
given the growing importance of embedded programming in the Internet of Things
world. With great support for integration into existing C or C++ code bases, Rust provides a much-needed and safe alternative to these two languages.

A hallmark and unique feature Rust is a type system build from ground up with concurrency in mind. Modern workloads often require scaling to multiple CPUs, but concurrency is still touched with hesistance, as it is a also a common source of bugs. Rusts type system is the only language in productive use that makes eliminates large classes of such bugs by raising concurrency patterns to the language level.

The Rust compiler takes great care about user experience, giving
helpful error messages and good hints, improving developer productivity and
onboarding. This extends to the environment, which comes good documentation
tools and a flexible, but easily usable build environment.

The Rust compiler has first class support for all major environments, including
Windows/MSVC. It also has support for mobile and embedded targets.

## Usage

Rust is actively used in multiple contexts and has seen widespread use. The
Rust compiler itself was developed hand-in-hand with some of those projects,
allowing for a great focus on practical problems. Some highlights are:

* [Servo](http://servo.org/): A complete browser rendering engine developed fully in Rust.
Especially uses many of Rusts concurrency features and build on top of them.

* [Firefox](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/): Many of the modern features of Firefox and also its speed gains are powered by Rust.

* [Dropbox](http://dropbox.com/): Dropbox uses Rust for their performance-critical infrastructure.

* [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/): VS Code uses ripgrep, a very fast
code searching tool, for its internal search function.

## Project state

The first stable release version of Rust has been on May 15th, 2015. The language has been in development for 6 years before that. Since then, all
stable features and libraries have full backwards compatibility
guarantees. The Rust project also provides necessary infrastructure, e.g. a way
of sharing libraries and building projects. It ships a whole development toolchain with pre-built support for more then 50 target systems, from all major
desktop and mobile operating systems to embedded operating systems of various sizes.

All changes to Rust happen through an RFC process, allowing users and stakeholders to track changes and read up on why additions were made. This doesn't impact the compatibility guarantees.

Active goals for are formulated per year, such as improving ergonomics for beginners in 2017.

The Rust project constantly runs surveys for both commercial and general users. 75% of all contributions to Rust come from  contributors outside of Mozilla. The language has a lively, community-driven, conference ecosystem, especially in Europe. Professional services and training are available.

## Public perception

Rust is known in systems programming circles, it is becoming more and more popular in the commercial world. The language is backed by Mozilla Research, one of the most respected research organisations worldwide. The first two years
have seen public adoption in a number of large engineering organisations around
the world. The language scores high in external surveys, such as winning the "most loved programming language" price in StackOverflows user surveys twice in a row.

Rust has a large European and German community, around the same size of the US community.

## Links and References

* Project page: http://rust-lang.org
* Project blog: http://blog.rust-lang.org
* Rust production users: https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/friends.html
* Rust commercial user survey 2016: https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/2016-rust-commercial-user-survey-results/4317
* Rust users survey 2017: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2017/09/05/Rust-2017-Survey-Results.html
* Stack overflow user survey 2017: https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2017#technology-most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-languages
